{{Short description|Graph-based distributed ledger data structure}}

A '''blockDAG''' ('''block Directed Acyclic Graph''') is a [[data structure]] used in [[distributed ledger technology]] where blocks can reference multiple predecessor blocks, forming a [[directed acyclic graph]] rather than a linear [[blockchain]].<ref name="phantom">{{cite conference |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Wyborski |first2=Shai |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |title=PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG: A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |conference=ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT 2021) |pages=57–70 |year=2021 |doi=10.1145/3479722.3480990 |url=https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3479722.3480990}}</ref> This structure allows multiple blocks to be created in parallel and incorporated into the ledger simultaneously, potentially increasing transaction throughput compared to single-chain architectures.

== Overview ==

In a traditional [[blockchain]], blocks form a linear chain where each block references exactly one parent. When multiple blocks are produced simultaneously (a common occurrence at high block rates due to network [[propagation delay]]), only one block is accepted into the canonical chain; the others become '''orphan blocks''' — wasted computational work in [[proof-of-work]] systems.<ref name="ghost">{{cite journal |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Zohar |first2=Aviv |title=Secure High-Rate Transaction Processing in Bitcoin |journal=Financial Cryptography and Data Security |year=2015 |doi=10.1007/978-3-662-47854-7_32}}</ref>

In a blockDAG, each block references '''all known unreferenced blocks''' (tips of the DAG) as parents, forming a directed acyclic graph. Parallel blocks are all included in the data structure. A '''consensus protocol''' then determines a total ordering over all blocks to resolve transaction conflicts.<ref name="phantom" />

The orphan rate in a blockchain is approximately:

:<math>\text{orphan\_rate} \approx 1 - e^{-\lambda \cdot D}</math>

where <math>\lambda</math> is the block production rate and <math>D</math> is the network propagation delay. In a blockDAG, this formula does not apply because parallel blocks are incorporated rather than discarded.<ref name="phantom" />

== Properties ==

BlockDAGs exhibit several formal properties that distinguish them from linear blockchain architectures:

* '''Zero orphan rate''' — In a blockchain, blocks produced in parallel compete for inclusion, and only one is retained. In a blockDAG, all blocks referencing known tips are incorporated into the structure, eliminating orphan blocks entirely.<ref name="phantom" />
* '''Parallel block inclusion''' — All honestly-mined blocks are incorporated into the DAG regardless of concurrent production. This ensures that computational work (in proof-of-work systems) is never wasted on blocks that are later discarded.<ref name="phantom" />
* '''Total ordering via consensus protocol''' — Despite the parallel structure, blockDAG consensus protocols (such as PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG) impose a deterministic total order on all blocks, enabling resolution of conflicting transactions without sacrificing parallelism.<ref name="phantom" />
* '''Scalability''' — Because the orphan rate does not increase with block production rate, throughput is limited primarily by node processing capacity and network [[Bandwidth (computing)|bandwidth]] rather than by the need to keep orphan rates low.<ref name="phantom" /><ref name="ghost" />

== History ==

The concept of using DAG-aware structures for cryptocurrency consensus was explored through several protocols by Yonatan Sompolinsky and collaborators:

* '''GHOST''' (2013/2015) — proposed by Sompolinsky and Zohar. The Greedy Heaviest-Observed Sub-Tree protocol modified [[Bitcoin]]'s longest-chain rule by weighing the entire sub-tree of blocks rather than just the longest path, improving security under high block rates. While still a blockchain (not a DAG), GHOST laid the theoretical groundwork for DAG-based consensus. It influenced [[Ethereum]]'s fork-choice rule (LMD-GHOST).<ref name="ghost" />

* '''SPECTRE''' (2016) — proposed by Sompolinsky, Lewenberg, and Zohar. The first full blockDAG protocol, providing fast confirmation but only a partial ordering (pairwise ordering of transactions rather than a total order over all blocks).<ref name="spectre">{{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1159 |title=SPECTRE: A Fast and Scalable Cryptocurrency Protocol |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Lewenberg |first2=Yoad |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |year=2016 |publisher=IACR ePrint}}</ref>

* '''PHANTOM''' (2018) — proposed by Sompolinsky, Wyborski, and Zohar. Provides a total ordering over all blocks by finding the maximum ''k''-cluster in the DAG, but the optimization problem is [[NP-hard]].<ref name="phantom" />

* '''GHOSTDAG''' (2018/2021) — a greedy polynomial-time approximation of PHANTOM. Deployed in the [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)|Kaspa]] cryptocurrency.<ref name="phantom" />

* '''DAG-KNIGHT''' (2022) — proposed by Sompolinsky and Sutton. A parameterless generalization that infers network conditions from the DAG topology.<ref name="dagknight">{{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1494 |title=The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Sutton |first2=Michael |year=2022 |publisher=IACR ePrint}}</ref>

Other DAG-based distributed ledger systems include [[IOTA (cryptocurrency)|IOTA]]'s Tangle, which uses a different DAG structure without discrete blocks.<ref>{{cite web |url=https://www.iota.org/ |title=IOTA |publisher=IOTA Foundation |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

== Consensus protocols ==

=== PHANTOM ===

PHANTOM introduces the concept of ''k-clusters'' to separate honest blocks from adversarial blocks in a DAG. A subset ''S'' of the DAG is a ''k''-cluster if for every block ''B'' in ''S'', the number of blocks in ''B'''s anticone (blocks with no ordering relationship to ''B'') that are also in ''S'' is at most ''k''.<ref name="phantom" />

The parameter ''k'' represents the expected number of parallel blocks during one network propagation delay: ''k'' ≈ 2''Dλ'', where ''D'' is propagation delay and ''λ'' is block rate. Honest miners reference all known blocks as parents, so honest parallel blocks have small anticones (≤ ''k''). Adversarial blocks, typically withheld and released later, have large anticones.<ref name="phantom" />

Finding the maximum ''k''-cluster is [[NP-hard]], making PHANTOM impractical for direct implementation.<ref name="phantom" />

=== GHOSTDAG ===

GHOSTDAG (Greedy Heaviest Observed Sub-Tree DAG) is a polynomial-time greedy approximation of PHANTOM. The algorithm:<ref name="phantom" />

# Each block selects the parent with the highest '''blue score''' (accumulated count of "blue" blocks in its past)
# The algorithm greedily builds a "blue set" following the '''selected parent chain'''
# All blocks are ordered: chain blocks by the selected parent chain, non-chain blocks interleaved at merge points
# Transaction conflicts are resolved by ordering (first in order wins)

GHOSTDAG is deployed in the [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)|Kaspa]] cryptocurrency, running at 10 blocks per second.<ref name="crescendo">{{cite web |url=https://kaspa.org/kaspa-updates-to-crescendo-and-10bps/ |title=Kaspa Updates to Crescendo and 10BPS |publisher=Kaspa.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

=== DAG-KNIGHT ===

DAG-KNIGHT eliminates the static ''k'' parameter by analyzing the DAG structure to infer current network conditions. It is described as the first permissionless proof-of-work protocol with no a priori bound on network latency.<ref name="dagknight" /> The protocol was published through Harvard's Center for Research on Computation and Society.<ref name="harvard">{{cite web |url=https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/applied-cryptography-society/publications/he-dag-knight-protocol-parameterless-generalization |title=The DAG KNIGHT Protocol |publisher=Harvard CRCS |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

=== Security analysis ===

Shai Wyborski provided a formal security proof for the PHANTOM/GHOSTDAG protocol family. In the course of this work, Wyborski identified and corrected a flaw in the original security argument. The corrected proof demonstrates that the probability of a transaction reversal decreases exponentially with the number of confirmations (confirmation depth), analogous to the result in Nakamoto's original [[Bitcoin]] analysis but generalized to the DAG setting. This result was peer-reviewed and published at the ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT 2021).<ref name="phantom" /><ref name="wyborski-dblp">{{cite web |url=https://dblp.org/pid/280/1635.html |title=Shai Wyborski — DBLP bibliography |publisher=[[DBLP]] |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

== Comparison with blockchain ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Property !! Blockchain !! BlockDAG
|-
| Block references || Single parent || Multiple parents (all tips)
|-
| Parallel blocks || Orphaned (discarded) || Incorporated (ordered)
|-
| Orphan rate || Increases with block rate || Zero (by design)
|-
| Throughput scaling || Limited by orphan rate || Limited by node/network capacity
|-
| Ordering || Inherent (linear chain) || Requires consensus protocol
|}

== Implementations ==

* [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)|Kaspa]] — [[proof-of-work]] blockDAG using GHOSTDAG consensus; 10 blocks per second<ref name="crescendo" />
* [[IOTA (cryptocurrency)|IOTA]] — uses a different DAG model (Tangle) without discrete blocks; currently transitioning from a coordinator-based model to [[proof-of-stake]]
* Conflux — [[proof-of-work]] tree-graph structure combining DAG and tree; also supports [[proof-of-stake]] finality<ref name="conflux">{{cite conference |last1=Li |first1=Chenxing |last2=Li |first2=Peilun |last3=Zhou |first3=Dong |last4=Xu |first4=Wei |last5=Long |first5=Fan |last6=Yao |first6=Andrew Chi-Chih |title=A Decentralized Blockchain with High Throughput and Fast Confirmation |conference=USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC 2020) |year=2020 |url=https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc20/presentation/li-chenxing}}</ref>
* Nano — uses a block-lattice DAG where each account has its own chain; secured by [[delegated proof-of-stake]] (Open Representative Voting)

== Applications beyond cryptocurrency ==

While blockDAGs originated in the context of cryptocurrency and distributed ledger technology, the underlying data structure and consensus approach have potential applications in broader [[distributed systems]]. Any system that requires parallel, decentralized data inclusion without a single point of serialization may benefit from a DAG-based architecture. Examples include distributed databases that must reconcile concurrent writes across geographically dispersed nodes, [[supply chain]] tracking systems where multiple participants independently record events, and [[Internet of things|IoT]] networks where numerous devices generate data simultaneously and no single coordinator can process all inputs in real time.

As a general [[computer science]] concept, a blockDAG decouples data inclusion from data ordering — all participants can contribute data in parallel, while a separate consensus layer resolves conflicts and establishes a canonical sequence. This separation makes blockDAGs a candidate architecture for systems where high write throughput and decentralization are both required.

== See also ==
* [[Blockchain]]
* [[Directed acyclic graph]]
* [[Consensus (computer science)]]
* [[Proof of work]]
* [[Nakamoto consensus]]

== References ==
{{Reflist}}

[[Category:Distributed computing]]
[[Category:Directed acyclic graphs]]
[[Category:Cryptocurrency]]
[[Category:Data structures]]
[[Category:Blockchain]]
