{{Short description|Proof-of-work cryptocurrency using blockDAG consensus}}
{{Infobox cryptocurrency
| name = Kaspa
| symbol = KAS
| logo =
| logo_size =
| release_date = {{Start date|2021|11|07}}
| founder = [[Yonatan Sompolinsky]]
| white_paper = [https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/104 PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG]
| consensus_mechanism = [[Proof of work]] ([[#GHOSTDAG|GHOSTDAG]])
| hash_algorithm = kHeavyHash
| block_time = 100 milliseconds
| supply_limit = 28.7 billion KAS
| website = {{URL|kaspa.org}}
| source_code = {{URL|github.com/kaspanet/rusty-kaspa}}
| programming_language = [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]]
}}

'''Kaspa''' is a [[proof-of-work]] [[cryptocurrency]] that uses a [[Directed acyclic graph|blockDAG]] (block Directed Acyclic Graph) structure instead of a traditional [[blockchain]]. Unlike single-chain cryptocurrencies such as [[Bitcoin]], Kaspa's blockDAG allows multiple blocks to be created in parallel and incorporated into the ledger simultaneously, enabling higher transaction throughput while maintaining proof-of-work security properties.<ref name="phantom">{{cite conference |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Wyborski |first2=Shai |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |title=PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG: A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |conference=ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT 2021) |pages=57–70 |year=2021 |doi=10.1145/3479722.3480990 |url=https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3479722.3480990}}</ref>

Kaspa was launched on November 7, 2021, with a [[fair launch]] — no [[premine]], no [[initial coin offering]] (ICO), and no team allocation of tokens.<ref name="fairlaunch">{{cite web |url=https://kaspa.org/kaspas-fair-launch/ |title=Kaspa's Fair Launch |publisher=Kaspa.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> All KAS tokens have been distributed exclusively through mining.

== History ==

=== Development ===

Kaspa's theoretical foundation was laid by [[Yonatan Sompolinsky]], who published the GHOST protocol in 2013 (later referenced in [[Ethereum]]'s fork-choice rule design)<ref name="ghost">{{cite journal |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Zohar |first2=Aviv |title=Secure High-Rate Transaction Processing in Bitcoin |journal=Financial Cryptography and Data Security |year=2015 |doi=10.1007/978-3-662-47854-7_32}}</ref> and the SPECTRE protocol in 2016.<ref name="spectre">{{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1159 |title=SPECTRE: A Fast and Scalable Cryptocurrency Protocol |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Lewenberg |first2=Yoad |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |year=2016 |publisher=IACR ePrint}}</ref> The PHANTOM protocol, which forms the theoretical basis for Kaspa's consensus, was published in 2018 and formally presented at the ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies in 2021.<ref name="phantom" />

Development was initially conducted by DAGLabs, a research and development company founded by Sompolinsky.<ref name="messari">{{cite web |url=https://messari.io/project/kaspa/profile |title=Kaspa Project Profile |publisher=Messari |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> DAGLabs was dissolved around the time of Kaspa's launch, and the project transitioned to community-led development.<ref name="fairlaunch" />

The reference implementation was rewritten from [[Go (programming language)|Go]] to [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]] (named "Rusty Kaspa") by Michael Sutton, who also co-authored the DAG-KNIGHT protocol paper with Sompolinsky.<ref name="dagknight">{{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1494 |title=The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Sutton |first2=Michael |year=2022 |publisher=IACR ePrint}}</ref>

=== Launch and Go implementation ===

Kaspa launched on November 7, 2021, as a [[fair launch]] cryptocurrency with an initial implementation written in [[Go (programming language)|Go]]. The project had no premine, no initial coin offering, no venture capital funding for token distribution, and no team allocation.<ref name="fairlaunch" /> Mining began with CPU-only accessibility; however, GPU miners came to dominate the network within weeks of launch.<ref name="fairlaunch" />

=== Rust rewrite ===

In 2022, development began on a full rewrite of the Kaspa node software in [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]], referred to as "Rusty Kaspa." The Rust implementation became the primary reference client, offering improved performance characteristics that enabled later throughput upgrades.<ref name="dagknight" />

=== ASIC transition ===

The network underwent a transition from GPU to [[application-specific integrated circuit|ASIC]] mining beginning in mid-2023, when IceRiver released the first kHeavyHash ASIC miners. Subsequent ASIC manufacturers entering the market included Bitmain (Antminer KS3), Goldshell (KA Box), and WindMiner.<ref name="mining">{{cite web |url=https://www.cryptominerbros.com/blog/top-kaspa-miners/ |title=Top Kaspa Miners |publisher=CryptoMinerBros |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

=== Crescendo hard fork ===

On May 5, 2025, the Crescendo hard fork increased Kaspa's block production rate from 1 block per second (BPS) to 10 BPS, reducing block time to 100 milliseconds.<ref name="crescendo">{{cite web |url=https://kaspa.org/kaspa-updates-to-crescendo-and-10bps/ |title=Kaspa Updates to Crescendo and 10BPS |publisher=Kaspa.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> The network had launched at 1 BPS, and this tenfold increase was enabled by performance improvements in the Rust implementation.

== Technology ==

=== BlockDAG architecture ===

{{Main|BlockDAG}}

In a traditional blockchain, each block references a single parent block, creating a linear chain. When two miners produce blocks simultaneously, only one is included — the other becomes an orphan block. This limits throughput because increasing the block rate also increases the orphan rate.<ref name="phantom" />

In Kaspa's blockDAG, each block references '''multiple parent blocks''' (all known tips of the DAG at the time of creation). Parallel blocks are all incorporated into the ledger rather than discarded. The GHOSTDAG consensus algorithm then produces a total ordering over all blocks.<ref name="phantom" />

This structure eliminates orphan blocks and the associated centralization pressure that limits throughput in single-chain proof-of-work systems.<ref name="phantom" />

=== GHOSTDAG consensus ===

GHOSTDAG (Greedy Heaviest Observed Sub-Tree DAG) is the consensus protocol running on Kaspa's mainnet. It is a greedy polynomial-time approximation of the PHANTOM protocol's NP-hard optimization problem.<ref name="phantom" />

The protocol uses the concept of ''k-clusters'' to distinguish between honestly-produced parallel blocks and potentially adversarial blocks. Honest miners reference all known blocks as parents, creating blocks with small "anticones" (sets of blocks with no ordering relationship). Adversarial blocks, which are typically withheld and released later, have large anticones.<ref name="phantom" />

GHOSTDAG greedily identifies the largest k-cluster as the "blue set" (honest blocks) and produces a total ordering via the '''selected parent chain''' (the path of blocks with the highest cumulative blue scores). Conflicting transactions are resolved by first-seen ordering within this total order.<ref name="phantom" />

Shai Wyborski provided the formal security proof that GHOSTDAG's ordering is irreversible with exponentially decreasing reversal probability as confirmation depth increases.<ref name="phantom" />

=== DAG-KNIGHT protocol ===

DAG-KNIGHT, co-authored by Sompolinsky and Sutton in 2022, is described as the first permissionless proof-of-work consensus protocol with no a priori bound on network latency.<ref name="dagknight" /> Unlike GHOSTDAG, which requires a static parameter ''k'' set before deployment, DAG-KNIGHT infers network conditions directly from the DAG topology and adapts confirmation times accordingly.<ref name="dagknight" />

The protocol was published through Harvard's Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS).<ref name="harvard">{{cite web |url=https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/applied-cryptography-society/publications/he-dag-knight-protocol-parameterless-generalization |title=The DAG KNIGHT Protocol |publisher=Harvard CRCS |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

{{As of|2026|03}}, DAG-KNIGHT has not been deployed on Kaspa's mainnet.<ref name="developments">{{cite web |url=https://kaspa.org/developments/ |title=Kaspa Developments |publisher=Kaspa.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

=== UTXO model ===

Kaspa uses the [[Unspent transaction output|UTXO]] (Unspent Transaction Output) model, the same transaction model used by Bitcoin. Each Kaspa block includes a UTXO set commitment using MuHash, a [[homomorphic hash function]] that enables incremental updates.<ref name="kip9">{{cite web |url=https://github.com/kaspanet/kips/blob/master/kip-0009.md |title=KIP-9: An Incentive-Compatible Storage Mass Formula |publisher=Kaspa KIPs |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

KIP-9 introduces a "storage mass" formula that increases transaction fees for transactions creating many small outputs (potential [[UTXO]] set bloat), using a harmonic mean-based calculation.<ref name="kip9" />

=== Data management ===

Kaspa employs aggressive [[data pruning|pruning]] to maintain compact node storage requirements. Full nodes retain only approximately 52 hours of block body data; older block bodies are discarded.<ref name="developments" /> The header chain, however, is preserved using a ''proof-of-proof-of-work'' scheme that keeps the header data compact — projected to remain under 100 MB even over 10,000 years of operation.<ref name="developments" />

New nodes joining the network are not required to replay the full transaction history. Instead, they can bootstrap from a recent [[UTXO]] state snapshot verified through MuHash UTXO commitments, a [[homomorphic hash function]] that enables incremental verification.<ref name="kip9" />

KIP-9's storage mass mechanism provides an economic disincentive against [[UTXO]] set bloat by increasing transaction fees for outputs that would expand the UTXO set disproportionately.<ref name="kip9" />

By contrast, [[Bitcoin]] full nodes store the complete block history since the genesis block (exceeding 600 GB as of 2025), [[Ethereum]] archive nodes require approximately 1.2 TB, and [[Solana]] validators require 2 TB or more of [[Solid-state drive#NVMe|NVMe]] storage.<ref>{{cite web |url=https://bitcoin.org/en/full-node |title=Running a Full Node |publisher=Bitcoin.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/ |title=Nodes and Clients |publisher=Ethereum.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> Kaspa's pruning design is intended to keep node storage requirements roughly constant over time.<ref name="developments" />

=== Smart contract development ===

Kaspa's base layer uses the UTXO model and does not natively support [[Turing completeness|Turing-complete]] [[smart contract]]s. Smart contract functionality is being pursued through [[Layer 2|layer-2]] solutions built on top of the Kaspa network. Igra Network, an L2 platform, launched in January 2026, and Kasplex announced a [[Zero-knowledge proof|zkEVM]]-based L2 in March 2026.<ref name="developments" />

A hard fork is planned for May 5, 2026, which proposes several base-layer extensions: KIP-16 (native asset issuance), KIP-17 ([[covenant (cryptography)|covenants]] enabling on-chain programmability), and support for [[zero-knowledge proof]] verification.<ref name="developments" /> These features are under active development and subject to change prior to deployment.

=== Emission schedule ===

Kaspa uses a "chromatic halving" emission schedule in which block rewards decrease smoothly over time rather than through periodic step-function halvings as in [[Bitcoin]].<ref name="tokenomics">{{cite web |url=https://kaspa.org/tokenomics-emission-and-mining/ |title=Tokenomics, Emission, and Mining |publisher=Kaspa.org |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> The block reward at month ''n'' after launch follows the formula:

: <math>\text{reward}(n) = \text{reward}_0 \times \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{n/12}</math>

where reward₀ is the initial block reward and ''n'' is the number of months since launch. Each month, the reward is multiplied by (1/2){{sup|1/12}} ≈ 0.9439, the [[twelve-tone equal temperament|frequency ratio between consecutive semitones]] in twelve-tone equal temperament. After 12 months — one [[octave]] — the cumulative effect is an exact halving of the block reward, analogous to frequency doubling across an octave in [[music theory]].<ref name="tokenomics" />

This produces a smooth [[exponential decay]] curve rather than Bitcoin's abrupt halvings, which cause sudden changes in miner revenue. The maximum supply is 28.7 billion KAS.<ref name="tokenomics" />

== Mining ==

Kaspa uses the kHeavyHash algorithm for proof-of-work mining. The network transitioned from CPU and GPU mining to [[application-specific integrated circuit|ASIC]] mining, with miners manufactured by companies including Bitmain, IceRiver, and Goldshell.<ref name="mining" />

== Reception ==

Kaspa has been listed on more than 33 cryptocurrency exchanges.<ref name="coingecko">{{cite web |url=https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/kaspa |title=Kaspa Price, Chart, Market Cap |publisher=CoinGecko |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> [[Binance]] launched KAS perpetual futures contracts in November 2024,<ref>{{cite web |url=https://www.binance.com/en/support/announcement/binance-futures-will-launch-usd-margined-kasusdt-perpetual-contract-with-up-to-75x-leverage |title=Binance Futures Will Launch KASUSDT Perpetual Contract |publisher=Binance |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> and [[Coinbase]] introduced KAS futures in February 2025.<ref>{{cite web |url=https://www.coinbase.com/blog/coinbase-derivatives-to-launch-kaspa-futures |title=Coinbase Derivatives to Launch Kaspa Futures |publisher=Coinbase |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref>

The KAS token reached an approximate peak market capitalization of $2.7 billion and had a market capitalization of roughly $800 million as of early 2026.<ref name="coingecko" /><ref name="coinmarketcap">{{cite web |url=https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/kaspa/ |title=Kaspa Price Today |publisher=CoinMarketCap |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> Kaspa has ranked among the top 50 cryptocurrencies by market capitalization on both CoinMarketCap and CoinGecko.<ref name="coingecko" /><ref name="coinmarketcap" /> Messari lists Kaspa as a proof-of-work project with a fair launch distribution model.<ref name="messari" />

== Network statistics ==

{{As of|2026|03}}, the Kaspa network hashrate is approximately 311–411 PH/s.<ref name="kasfyi">{{cite web |url=https://kas.fyi |title=Kaspa Network Statistics |publisher=Kas.fyi |access-date=2026-03-09}}</ref> The network has processed over 601 million total transactions, with approximately 386,000 daily transactions.<ref name="kasfyi" /> The number of active addresses has grown steadily since launch.<ref name="kasfyi" />

== See also ==
* [[Directed acyclic graph]]
* [[Proof of work]]
* [[Bitcoin]]
* [[Cryptocurrency]]
* [[Blockchain]]
* [[Consensus (computer science)]]

== References ==
{{Reflist}}

== External links ==
* {{Official website|kaspa.org}}
* [https://github.com/kaspanet/rusty-kaspa Kaspa source code] on [[GitHub]]
* [https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/104 PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG paper] on IACR ePrint
* [https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1494 DAG-KNIGHT paper] on IACR ePrint
* [https://explorer.kaspa.org/ Kaspa block explorer]

{{Cryptocurrencies}}

[[Category:Cryptocurrencies]]
[[Category:Proof-of-work cryptocurrencies]]
[[Category:Computer-related introductions in 2021]]
[[Category:Directed acyclic graphs]]
