{{Short description|BlockDAG consensus protocol}}

'''PHANTOM''' is a [[consensus protocol]] for [[Directed acyclic graph|blockDAG]] (block directed acyclic graph) systems proposed by [[Yonatan Sompolinsky]], Shai Wyborski, and [[Aviv Zohar]]. Published at the [[ACM]] Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT) in 2021, PHANTOM provides a method for establishing a [[total order]] over all blocks in a [[Directed acyclic graph|DAG]], generalizing [[Nakamoto consensus]] from a linear [[blockchain]] to a DAG structure.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}} The optimization problem at the core of PHANTOM is [[NP-hard]]; '''GHOSTDAG''' is its practical [[Time complexity#Polynomial time|polynomial-time]] greedy approximation, deployed in the [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)|Kaspa]] cryptocurrency.

== Background ==

In [[Nakamoto consensus]] ([[Bitcoin]]), blocks form a linear chain. The [[longest chain rule]] determines the canonical transaction history: miners extend the longest available chain, and competing forks are resolved by discarding shorter branches.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Zohar|2015}}

At high block production rates, network [[Propagation delay|propagation delay]] causes many blocks to be mined in parallel. In a linear blockchain, these parallel blocks become [[orphan block]]s, wasting [[Proof of work|computational work]] and reducing the system's security guarantees. This creates a fundamental tension between throughput and security.

A blockDAG structure addresses this by including ''all'' validly produced blocks rather than discarding those not on the longest chain. However, a DAG alone does not resolve conflicting transactions or establish a canonical history. A consensus protocol is required to impose an ordering over the blocks in the DAG. PHANTOM solves this ordering problem.

== ''k''-cluster theory ==

The core theoretical concept in PHANTOM is the ''k''-cluster.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}}

=== Definition ===

A subset ''S'' of blocks in a DAG is a '''{{mvar|k}}-cluster''' if, for every block ''B'' in ''S'', the number of blocks in ''B''{{'}}s [[anticone]] that are also in ''S'' is at most ''k''. The anticone of a block ''B'' consists of all blocks with no ordering relationship to ''B'' — that is, blocks that are neither in ''B''{{'}}s past (ancestors) nor in ''B''{{'}}s future (descendants).

=== Relationship to network conditions ===

The parameter ''k'' relates to network conditions by the approximation:

: <math>k \approx 2D\lambda</math>

where ''D'' is the network [[propagation delay]] and ''&lambda;'' is the block production rate. This relationship captures the expected degree of parallelism among honestly produced blocks.

=== Honest and adversarial blocks ===

Honest miners follow the protocol by referencing all known [[Directed acyclic graph#Terminology|tips]] (unreferenced blocks) in the DAG. When multiple honest miners produce blocks in parallel, these blocks have small anticones bounded by ''k'', and they collectively form a ''k''-cluster. This set is called the '''blue set'''.

Adversarial blocks, by contrast, are typically withheld and released later, creating large anticones that exceed the ''k'' threshold. These blocks fall outside the ''k''-cluster and are assigned to the '''red set'''.

PHANTOM's goal is to find the '''maximum {{mvar|k}}-cluster''' in the DAG — the largest set of blocks consistent with honest mining behaviour — and use it to derive a total ordering of all blocks.

== NP-hardness ==

Sompolinsky, Wyborski, and Zohar proved that finding the maximum ''k''-cluster in a DAG is [[NP-hard]].{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}} This result means that PHANTOM as originally defined cannot be computed efficiently in the general case; no [[polynomial-time algorithm]] is known for the problem, and the existence of one would imply [[P versus NP problem|P = NP]].

This computational intractability motivated the development of GHOSTDAG as a practical greedy approximation that trades optimality for efficiency.

== GHOSTDAG ==

'''GHOSTDAG''' is a [[Greedy algorithm|greedy]], polynomial-time approximation of PHANTOM.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}} It is the algorithm deployed in practice.

=== Algorithm ===

GHOSTDAG operates as follows:

# Each new block selects a '''selected parent''' — the parent block with the highest ''blue score'' (the size of the blue set in that block's past).
# The algorithm greedily extends the blue set by following the selected parent chain, adding blocks that satisfy the ''k''-cluster condition relative to the current blue set.
# This process produces a '''selected parent chain''' analogous to the longest chain in Nakamoto consensus.

=== Total ordering ===

GHOSTDAG produces a total ordering over all blocks in the DAG:

* Blocks on the selected parent chain are ordered according to their position on that chain.
* Off-chain blocks (blocks not on the selected parent chain) are interleaved at their respective [[Directed acyclic graph#Terminology|merge points]] — the earliest selected-chain block that has the off-chain block in its past.
* Transaction conflicts are resolved by ordering: the first transaction in the GHOSTDAG order takes precedence.

=== Deployment ===

GHOSTDAG is deployed in [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)|Kaspa]], which operates at 10 [[blocks per second]].

== Security proof ==

A formal security proof for GHOSTDAG was developed by Shai Wyborski.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}} During the proof process, Wyborski identified and corrected a flaw in the original security argument presented in the earlier ePrint preprint of the protocol.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Zohar|2018}}

The corrected proof demonstrates that the probability of an ordering reversal (a confirmed transaction being displaced) decreases [[Exponential decay|exponentially]] as the confirmation depth increases, paralleling the security guarantees of Nakamoto consensus. The result was [[peer review]]ed and published in the ACM AFT 2021 proceedings.

== Relationship to other protocols ==

PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG occupy a specific position in the lineage of DAG-based consensus protocols:

* '''[[GHOST protocol|GHOST]]''' (2015): A predecessor by Sompolinsky and Zohar that modifies the [[fork choice rule]] in a blockchain (not a DAG) by weighting subtrees rather than chain length.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Zohar|2015}}
* '''SPECTRE''' (2016): A blockDAG protocol by the same research group that provides a ''partial'' ordering over blocks, sufficient for payment transactions but not for general [[smart contract]]s or applications requiring total ordering.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|Lewenberg|Zohar|2016}}
* '''DAG-KNIGHT''' (2022): A successor protocol that eliminates the need for a predetermined ''k'' parameter by inferring network conditions directly from the structure of the DAG.{{sfn|Sompolinsky|2022}}

PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG bridge the gap between SPECTRE's partial ordering and the requirements of a general-purpose [[distributed ledger]]. They provide the first blockDAG protocol with a total ordering, enabling support for arbitrary transaction types beyond simple payments.

== See also ==

* [[Directed acyclic graph|BlockDAG]]
* [[GHOST protocol]]
* [[Kaspa (cryptocurrency)]]
* [[Nakamoto consensus]]
* [[NP-hardness]]
* [[Directed acyclic graph]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

=== Sources ===

* {{cite conference |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Wyborski |first2=Shai |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |title=PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG: A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |conference=ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT 2021) |pages=57–70 |year=2021 |doi=10.1145/3479722.3480990 |url=https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3479722.3480990 |ref={{sfnref|Sompolinsky|Wyborski|Zohar|2021}}}}
* {{cite journal |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Zohar |first2=Aviv |title=Secure High-Rate Transaction Processing in Bitcoin |journal=Financial Cryptography and Data Security |year=2015 |doi=10.1007/978-3-662-47854-7_32 |ref={{sfnref|Sompolinsky|Zohar|2015}}}}
* {{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1159 |title=SPECTRE: A Fast and Scalable Cryptocurrency Protocol |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Lewenberg |first2=Yoad |last3=Zohar |first3=Aviv |year=2016 |publisher=IACR ePrint |ref={{sfnref|Sompolinsky|Lewenberg|Zohar|2016}}}}
* {{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1494 |title=DAG-KNIGHT: An Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus |last=Sompolinsky |first=Yonatan |year=2022 |publisher=IACR ePrint |ref={{sfnref|Sompolinsky|2022}}}}
* {{cite web |url=https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/104 |title=PHANTOM: A Scalable BlockDAG Protocol |last1=Sompolinsky |first1=Yonatan |last2=Zohar |first2=Aviv |year=2018 |publisher=IACR ePrint |ref={{sfnref|Sompolinsky|Zohar|2018}}}}

{{Cryptocurrency}}

[[Category:Consensus algorithms]]
[[Category:Distributed computing]]
[[Category:Directed acyclic graphs]]
[[Category:Cryptocurrency]]
[[Category:Computational complexity theory]]
